README.md, before:

# netcupscp-exporter
Prometheus Exporter for [Netcup ServerControlPanel (SCP) WebService](https://www.netcup-wiki.de/wiki/Netcup_SCP_Webservice) to provide external visibility into server state.
## Caveat
As per Netcup support, be aware that they do not provide support for their own API. 
Endpoints might change or break suddenly. 
Due to the limited documentation, this exporter makes a couple of assumptions when interpreting the responses of the API. 
Therefore, treat any values you get with caution. 

## Usage
* Log into [SCP](https://servercontrolpanel.de)
* Activate WebService and generate a password/token for it
* Use token for this exporter in conjunction with your user id

```
./netcupscp-exporter --login-name ID --password PASSWORD
```

Default port: 9757

### Helm Chart

A Helm Chart is available [here](https://github.com/christianknell/helm-charts/tree/main/charts/netcupscp-exporter).

## Metrics

```
# HELP scp_build_info A metric with a constant '1' value labeled by version, revision, branch, and goversion from which scp was built.
# TYPE scp_build_info gauge
scp_build_info{branch="",goversion="go1.17.5",revision="71a8595111dd83c45d9c0dd1e7d4418fc9f6928a",version="v0.1.0"} 1
# HELP scp_cpu_cores Number of CPU cores
# TYPE scp_cpu_cores gauge
scp_cpu_cores{vserver="servername"} 4
# HELP scp_disk_capacity_bytes Available storage space in Bytes
# TYPE scp_disk_capacity_bytes gauge
scp_disk_capacity_bytes{driver="scsi",name="vda",vserver="servername"} 3.4359738368e+11
# HELP scp_disk_optimization Optimization recommended (1) / not recommended (0)
# TYPE scp_disk_optimization gauge
scp_disk_optimization{driver="scsi",message="",name="vda",vserver="servername"} 0
# HELP scp_disk_used_bytes Used storage space in Bytes
# TYPE scp_disk_used_bytes gauge
scp_disk_used_bytes{driver="scsi",name="vda",vserver="servername"} 3.221225472e+09
# HELP scp_interface_throttled Interface's traffic is throttled (1) or not (0)
# TYPE scp_interface_throttled gauge
scp_interface_throttled{driver="virtio",id="iface_id",ip="1.2.3.4",ip_type="ipv4",mac="aa:bb:cc:dd:ee:ff",throttle_message="",vserver="servername"} 0
scp_interface_throttled{driver="virtio",id="iface_id",ip="1:2:3:4::/64",ip_type="ipv6",mac="aa:bb:cc:dd:ee:ff",throttle_message="",vserver="servername"} 0
# HELP scp_ip_info IPs assigned to this server
# TYPE scp_ip_info gauge
scp_ip_info{ip="1.2.3.4",vserver="servername"} 1
scp_ip_info{ip="1:2:3:4::",vserver="servername"} 1
# HELP scp_memory_bytes Amount of Memory in Bytes
# TYPE scp_memory_bytes gauge
scp_memory_bytes{vserver="servername"} 1.8013487104e+10
# HELP scp_monthlytraffic_in_bytes Monthly traffic incoming in Bytes (only gigabyte-level resolution)
# TYPE scp_monthlytraffic_in_bytes gauge
scp_monthlytraffic_in_bytes{month="1",vserver="servername",year="2022"} 2.097152e+06
# HELP scp_monthlytraffic_out_bytes Monthly traffic outgoing in Bytes (only gigabyte-level resolution)
# TYPE scp_monthlytraffic_out_bytes gauge
scp_monthlytraffic_out_bytes{month="1",vserver="servername",year="2022"} 0
# HELP scp_monthlytraffic_total_bytes Total monthly traffic in Bytes (only gigabyte-level resolution)
# TYPE scp_monthlytraffic_total_bytes gauge
scp_monthlytraffic_total_bytes{month="1",vserver="servername",year="2022"} 2.097152e+06
# HELP scp_reboot_recommended Reboot recommended (1) / not recommended (0)
# TYPE scp_reboot_recommended gauge
scp_reboot_recommended{message="",vserver="servername"} 0
# HELP scp_rescue_active Rescue system active (1) / inactive (0)
# TYPE scp_rescue_active gauge
scp_rescue_active{message="",vserver="servername"} 0
# HELP scp_server_start_time_seconds Start time of the vserver in seconds (only minute-level resolution)
# TYPE scp_server_start_time_seconds gauge
scp_server_start_time_seconds{vserver="servername"} 1.64047511e+09
# HELP scp_server_status Online (1) / Offline (0) status
# TYPE scp_server_status gauge
scp_server_status{nickname="nick1",status="online",vserver="servername"} 1
```

## Build
```
make
```
or 
```
docker build -o netcupscp-exporter .
```

## Maintenance
### Generating the SOAP client
Generated by [gowsdl](https://github.com/hooklift/gowsdl/) via

```
gowsdl -p scpclient -o scpclient.go <(curl "https://www.servercontrolpanel.de/SCP/WSEndUser?wsdl")
```

Manual adjustments:

* Remove the namespace `http://enduser.service.web.vcp.netcup.de/` in return XML Names
* Add ``XMLName xml.Name `xml:"tns:func"` `` to the functions
* Add ``Xmlns string `xml:"xmlns:tns,attr" json:"-"` `` to set the namespace on these functions

Commit message:

added Grafana dashboard to README

README.md, after:

# netcupscp-exporter
Prometheus Exporter for [Netcup ServerControlPanel (SCP) WebService](https://www.netcup-wiki.de/wiki/Netcup_SCP_Webservice) to provide external visibility into server state.
## Caveat
As per Netcup support, be aware that they do not provide support for their own API. 
Endpoints might change or break suddenly. 
Due to the limited documentation, this exporter makes a couple of assumptions when interpreting the responses of the API. 
Therefore, treat any values you get with caution. 

## Usage
* Log into [SCP](https://servercontrolpanel.de)
* Activate WebService and generate a password/token for it
* Use token for this exporter in conjunction with your user id

```
./netcupscp-exporter --login-name ID --password PASSWORD
```

Default port: 9757

### Helm Chart

A Helm Chart is available [here](https://github.com/christianknell/helm-charts/tree/main/charts/netcupscp-exporter).

### Grafana

A Grafana dashboard is available [here](https://grafana.com/grafana/dashboards/16705).

![A preview of the Grafana dashboard.](grafana/dashboard.jpg "A preview of the Grafana dashboard.")

## Metrics

```
# HELP scp_build_info A metric with a constant '1' value labeled by version, revision, branch, and goversion from which scp was built.
# TYPE scp_build_info gauge
scp_build_info{branch="",goversion="go1.17.5",revision="71a8595111dd83c45d9c0dd1e7d4418fc9f6928a",version="v0.1.0"} 1
# HELP scp_cpu_cores Number of CPU cores
# TYPE scp_cpu_cores gauge
scp_cpu_cores{vserver="servername"} 4
# HELP scp_disk_capacity_bytes Available storage space in Bytes
# TYPE scp_disk_capacity_bytes gauge
scp_disk_capacity_bytes{driver="scsi",name="vda",vserver="servername"} 3.4359738368e+11
# HELP scp_disk_optimization Optimization recommended (1) / not recommended (0)
# TYPE scp_disk_optimization gauge
scp_disk_optimization{driver="scsi",message="",name="vda",vserver="servername"} 0
# HELP scp_disk_used_bytes Used storage space in Bytes
# TYPE scp_disk_used_bytes gauge
scp_disk_used_bytes{driver="scsi",name="vda",vserver="servername"} 3.221225472e+09
# HELP scp_interface_throttled Interface's traffic is throttled (1) or not (0)
# TYPE scp_interface_throttled gauge
scp_interface_throttled{driver="virtio",id="iface_id",ip="1.2.3.4",ip_type="ipv4",mac="aa:bb:cc:dd:ee:ff",throttle_message="",vserver="servername"} 0
scp_interface_throttled{driver="virtio",id="iface_id",ip="1:2:3:4::/64",ip_type="ipv6",mac="aa:bb:cc:dd:ee:ff",throttle_message="",vserver="servername"} 0
# HELP scp_ip_info IPs assigned to this server
# TYPE scp_ip_info gauge
scp_ip_info{ip="1.2.3.4",vserver="servername"} 1
scp_ip_info{ip="1:2:3:4::",vserver="servername"} 1
# HELP scp_memory_bytes Amount of Memory in Bytes
# TYPE scp_memory_bytes gauge
scp_memory_bytes{vserver="servername"} 1.8013487104e+10
# HELP scp_monthlytraffic_in_bytes Monthly traffic incoming in Bytes (only gigabyte-level resolution)
# TYPE scp_monthlytraffic_in_bytes gauge
scp_monthlytraffic_in_bytes{month="1",vserver="servername",year="2022"} 2.097152e+06
# HELP scp_monthlytraffic_out_bytes Monthly traffic outgoing in Bytes (only gigabyte-level resolution)
# TYPE scp_monthlytraffic_out_bytes gauge
scp_monthlytraffic_out_bytes{month="1",vserver="servername",year="2022"} 0
# HELP scp_monthlytraffic_total_bytes Total monthly traffic in Bytes (only gigabyte-level resolution)
# TYPE scp_monthlytraffic_total_bytes gauge
scp_monthlytraffic_total_bytes{month="1",vserver="servername",year="2022"} 2.097152e+06
# HELP scp_reboot_recommended Reboot recommended (1) / not recommended (0)
# TYPE scp_reboot_recommended gauge
scp_reboot_recommended{message="",vserver="servername"} 0
# HELP scp_rescue_active Rescue system active (1) / inactive (0)
# TYPE scp_rescue_active gauge
scp_rescue_active{message="",vserver="servername"} 0
# HELP scp_server_start_time_seconds Start time of the vserver in seconds (only minute-level resolution)
# TYPE scp_server_start_time_seconds gauge
scp_server_start_time_seconds{vserver="servername"} 1.64047511e+09
# HELP scp_server_status Online (1) / Offline (0) status
# TYPE scp_server_status gauge
scp_server_status{nickname="nick1",status="online",vserver="servername"} 1
```

## Build
```
make
```
or 
```
docker build -o netcupscp-exporter .
```

## Maintenance
### Generating the SOAP client
Generated by [gowsdl](https://github.com/hooklift/gowsdl/) via

```
gowsdl -p scpclient -o scpclient.go <(curl "https://www.servercontrolpanel.de/SCP/WSEndUser?wsdl")
```

Manual adjustments:

* Remove the namespace `http://enduser.service.web.vcp.netcup.de/` in return XML Names
* Add ``XMLName xml.Name `xml:"tns:func"` `` to the functions
* Add ``Xmlns string `xml:"xmlns:tns,attr" json:"-"` `` to set the namespace on these functions
